Minor components: (1) organic acids
1. Organic acids- functions in foodsimpart flavour and tartness
Some used as antimicrobial agentsadjust pH or acidity of food
(acidulants)
1. Organic acids-
Examples:
◦malic acid (apples)
◦ citric acid (citrus fruits, tomatoes,
strawberries)
◦tartaric acid (grapes)
◦lactic acid (yogurt, cheese, olives,
sauerkraut)
Ingredients list: sugar, glucose
syrup, modified corn starch,
lactic acid, citric acid, tartaric
acid, artificial flavour, colour
(with tartrazine)
1.Organic acids- determining acidityOne simple method is to:
A sour or acidic taste is a positiveindicator.
 highly subjective (sensitivity varies between individuals)
TASTE it!
1.Organic acids- determining acidityusing a pH meter
measure the H+ concentration
then converted to a pH value. 
1. Organic acids- pH
What is pH?
◦ The measure of the acidity
pH ranges from 0 (very acidic) to 7 (neutral) to 14 (very alkaline)
◦ What is the importance of pH in foods?
◦ determines the rate of chemical & enzymatic reactions
◦ Microbial growth/survival in foods
◦ pH value of 4.6 –critical to the Food industry◦ borderline between: ”Acid & Low-acid foods”
1. Organic acids- pH
Acidic or acid foods (pH < 4.6)
◦ eg. citrus juices, apple juice, strawberries, apples
◦Will not support growth of most diseasecausing microorganisms.
Low-acid foods (pH > 4.6)
◦ eg. meat, fish, vegetables
Products pH value Acidity classificationMeat, fish, poultry 7.0
Low acid (pH > 4.6)Milk 6.5
Corn 6.3
Wheat flour 6.0
Potatoes, peas 5.8
Carrots 5.1
Figs 5.0
Garlic 5.8
Apples 3.7
Acid (pH 0 - 4.6)Cherries 3.6
Oranges, pears, tomatoes 3.5
Pickles 3.0
Lemon/lime juice 2.3
Total Acidity vs. pH
o The two concepts are different
o Total acidity (titratable acidity)
measures the total acid concentrationo pH quantifies H+ concentration (active acidity)
Minor components: (2) Colours and Pigments
2. Colours & Pigments
 Naturally occur. in the foods
 extracted from natural or synthetic sources- added to foods.
 Review different class of pigments- Lesson 2…o Carotenoids
• Red colour, in tomatoes (lycopene)
• Orange colour in carrots (beta carotene)
o Anthocyanins
• blueberries, cherries, cranberries, plums and red cabbage
o Chlorophyll
Minor components: (3) Aroma & Taste
compounds
3. Aroma & Taste compounds… Aroma and taste profiles of foods = FLAVOUR◦ complex – 100s or 1000s of compounds, ◦ e.g. aldehydes, ketones, acids, alcohols, fatty acids
◦ Aroma: volatile compounds
◦ Taste: non-volatile
◦ present as part of the food matrix (eg strawberries), or◦ modified (eg cooked strawberries)
Table in Less. 2 for diversity of
compounds aroma of COFFEE
Chromatogram of Regular Caffeine Coffee 1.5 mg.
Thermal Analysis 250 deg. C for 6 minutes
Minor components: (4) Vitamins & Minerals
4. Vitamins & Minerals
• No effect on flavour, colour, texture of food (in the amount appeared in food)
• low amounts in the diet- maintain health
• Water soluble vitamins
• Vitamin C, B complex, folic acid
• Fat soluble vitamins
• Vitamins A, D, E, K
• Some used as food additives: Preservatives (antioxidants)• Minerals e.g. Ca, Mg, Na, K, Fe, Zn … added as their salt